# Data Schemas and Extension Properties Troubleshooting

<!---IMPORT org.jetbrains.kotlinx.dataframe.samples.schemas.DataSchemasTroubleshooting-->

Sometimes you can get an exception with a message containing

```plain text
..exception in generated DataFrame extension property..
```

This means there is a runtime error while accessing a [`DataFrame` extension property](extensionPropertiesApi.md),
generated by the [Compiler Plugin](Compiler-Plugin.md) or in [Kotlin Notebook](SetupKotlinNotebook.md).

Such errors are caused by generating extension properties for data schemas that are not compatible with the 
[`DataFrame`](DataFrame.md), [`DataRow`](DataRow.md), etc. 
In most cases, the schema contains columns with an incorrect name or type.

For example:

<!---FUN Schema-->

```kotlin
@DataSchema
interface Schema {
    val age: String
}
```

<!---END-->

Read a simple csv with a column of integers:

```csv
age
17
32
26
```

<!---FUN extensionGeneratedWithAnIncompatibleSchema-->

```kotlin
val df = DataFrame.readCsv(simpleCsvFile).cast<Schema>()

// Compiles correctly but fails on runtime
df.filter { age > "20" }
```

<!---END-->

## Possible reasons

### Incompatible manually defined data schema

If you define the initial data schema manually,
make sure your data schema is compatible with the dataframe.

* Use [`.cast<Schema>()`](cast.md) with `verify=true` for verifying the `Schema` compatibility.
* Use [special methods](DataSchemaGenerationMethods.md) for generating a data schema code 
instead of defining data schema manually. However, you may still need to edit a generated schema —
adjust a type nullability or the whole type, since sometimes type can be inferred incorrect 
if the data sample used for generation is not representative or if there's a bug in this `DataFrame`.

### Bug in the DataFrame reader

Sometimes a column is created internally with an incorrect `KType` that doesn't represent actual runtime values.
As a result, [`schema().print()`](schema.md), 
[`generateInterfaces`](DataSchemaGenerationMethods.md#generateinterfaces), 
`print(columnTypes = true)` show misleading type.

This can happen when reading a dataframe from files or databases.

> Such cases are most probably bugs! Please report them on [GitHub Issues](https://github.com/Kotlin/dataframe/issues).
{style="warning"}

Possible workarounds (for [`ValueColumn`s](DataColumn.md#valuecolumn)):

1) Update runtime column type:

   * Specify the correct type using [`.replace {}`](replace.md) and `ValueColumn.changeType()`:

   <!---ignore:incorrect indent FUN changeType-->

    ```kotlin
    df.replace { wrongTypeCol }.with { it.asValueColumn().changeType(typeOf<ActualType>()) }
    ```

    <!---ignore:incorrect indent END-->

   * Use [`.inferType { columns }`](inferType.md) to infer the correct types 
   for the selected columns from the actual values. Doesn't work for generic types like `Map`.
    > `inferType()` can take a long time and use up a lot of resources for large dataframes, so we recommend 
    > using it once to figure out the actual type and change it to `changeType()` for production code.
    {style="warning"}

2) Change the compiler-time schema of a dataframe

You need to edit (you can view the correct one with [`.schema().print()`](schema.md)) or regenerate 
the correct data schema (with [generate..()](DataSchemaGenerationMethods.md) methods)
manually and apply it (with [`cast()`](cast.md) or [`convertTo()`](convertTo.md)).

#### Problems with type affinity in SQLite

Because of [SQLite type affinity](https://sqlite.org/datatype3.html), 
the column [typed defined by JDBC](readSqlDatabases.md) may differ from the actual values in the column.
This problem often occurs when reading data from an SQLite database with column of custom types.

You can provide types for such columns manually:

<!---FUN readSqliteCustom-->

```kotlin
val sqliteCustom = Sqlite.withCustomTypes(
    mapOf(
        "LONGVARCHAR" to typeOf<String>(),
        "LONGINT" to typeOf<Long>(),
    ),
)
val df = DataFrame.readSqlTable(
    connectionConfig,
    "table_name",
    dbType = sqliteCustom,
)
```

<!---END-->
